# Executive Summary
* Assessment of the social science literature and regional case studies reveals how social norms, culture, and individual choices, interact with infrastructure and other structural changes over time. This provides new insight into climate change mitigation strategies, and how economic and social activity might be organised across sectors to support emission reductions. To enhance well-being, people demand services and not primary energy and physical resources per se. Focusing on demand for services and the different social and political roles people play broadens the participation in climate action.  

### Potential of demand-side actions and service provisioning systems 
* **Demand-side mitigation and new ways of providing services can help avoid, shift, and improve final service demand. Rapid and deep changes in demand make it easier for every sector to reduce GHG emissions in the short and medium term (high confidence).{5.2, 5.3}**     

* **The indicative potential of demand-side strategies across all sectors to reduce emissions is 40-70% by 2050 (high confidence).** Technical mitigation potentials compared to the IEA WEO, 2020 STEPS baseline amounts up to 5.7 GtCO2eq for building use and construction, 8 GtCO2eq for food demand, 6.5 GtCO2eq for land transport, and 5.2 GtCO2eq for industry.Mitigation strategies can be classified as Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) options, that reflect opportunities for socio-cultural, infrastructural, and technological change. The greatest Avoid potential comes from reducing long-haul aviation and providing short-distance low-carbon urban infrastructures. The greatest Shift potential would come from switching to plant-based diets. The greatest Improve potential comes from within the building sector, and in particular increased use of energy efficient end-use technologies and passive housing. {5.3.1, 5.3.2, Figure 5.7, Figure 5.8, Table 5.1, Table SM.2}  

* **Socio-cultural and lifestyle changes can accelerate climate change mitigation (medium confidence).** Among 60 identified actions that could change individual consumption, individual mobility choices have the largest potential to reduce carbon footprints.Prioritizingcar-free mobility by walking and cycling and adoption of electric mobility could save 2 tCO2eq cap-1 yr-1. Other options with high mitigation potential include reducing air travel, cooling setpoint adjustments, reduced appliance use, shifts to public transit, and shifting consumption towards plant-based diets.s. {5.3.1, 5.3.1.2, Figure 32 5.8} 
  
* **Leveraging improvements in end-use service delivery through behavioural and technological innovations, and innovations in market organisation, leads to large reductions in upstream resource use(high confidence).** Analysis of indicative potentials range from a factor 10 to 20 fold improvement in the case of available energy (exergy) analysis, with the highest improvement potentials at the end-user and service-provisioning levels. Realisable service level efficiency improvements could reduce upstream energy demand by 45% in 2050.{5.3.2, Figure 5.10}  

*  **Alternative service provision systems, for example those enabled through digitalisation, sharing economy initiatives and circular economy initiatives, have to date made a limited contribution to climate change mitigation (medium confidence).** While digitalisation through specific new products and applications holds potential for improvement in service-level efficiencies, without public policies and regulations, it also has the potential to increase consumption and energy use. Reducing the energy use of data centres, networks, and connected devices is possible in managing low-carbon digitalisation. Claims on the benefits of the circular economy for sustainability and climate change mitigation have limited evidence. {5.3.4, 5.3.4.1, 5.3.4.2, Figure 5.12, Figure 5.13}  

###  Social aspects of demand-side mitigation actions

* **Decent living standards (DLS) and well-being for all are achievable through the implementation of high-efficiency low demand mitigation pathways (medium confidence).** Decent Living Standards (DLS) – a benchmark of material conditions for human well-being – overlaps with many Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Minimum requirements of energy use consistent with enabling well-being 
for all is between 20 and 50 GJ cap-1 yr-1 7 depending on the context. {5.2.2.1, 5.2.2.2, Box 5.3}  

* **Providing better services with less energy and resource input has high technical potential and is consistent with providing well-being for all (medium confidence).** Assessment of 19 demand-side mitigation options and 18 different constituents of well-being show that positive impacts on well-being outweigh negative ones by a factor of 11. {5.2, 5.2.3, Figure 5.6,}

*  **Demand-side mitigation options bring multiple interacting benefits (high confidence).** Energy services to meet human needs for nutrition, shelter, health, etc. are met in many different ways with different emissions implications that depend on local contexts, cultures, geography, available technologies, social preferences. In the near term, many less-developed countries and poor people everywhere require better access to safe and low-emissions energy sources to ensure decent living standards and increase energy savings from service improvements by about 20-25%. {5.2, 5.4.5, Figure 5.3, Figure 5.4, Figure 5.5, Figure 5.6, Box 5.2, Box 5.3}  

* **Granular technologies and decentralized energy end-use, characterised by modularity, small unit sizes and small unit costs, diffuse faster into markets and are associated with faster technological learning benefits, greater efficiency, more opportunities to escape technological lock-in, and greater employment (high confidence).** Examples include solar photovoltaic systems, batteries, and thermal heat pumps. {5.3, 5.5, 5.5.3}

* **Wealthy individuals contribute disproportionately to higher emissions and have a high potential for emissions reductions while maintaining decent living standards and well-being (high confidence).** Individuals with high socio-economic status are capable of reducing their GHG emissions by becoming role models of low-carbon lifestyles, investing in low-carbon businesses, and advocating for stringent climate policies. {5.4.1, 5.4.3, 5.4.4, Figure 5.14}  

* **Demand-side solutions require both motivation and capacity for change (high confidence).** Motivation by individuals or households worldwide to change energy consumption behaviour is generally low. Individual behavioural change is insufficient for climate change mitigation unless embedded in structural and cultural change. Different factors influence individual motivation and capacity for change in different demographics and geographies. These factors go beyond traditional socio-demographic and economic predictors and include psychological variables such as awareness, perceived risk, subjective and social norms, values, and perceived behavioural control. Behavioural nudges promote easy behaviour change, e.g., “improve” actions such as making investments in energy efficiency, but fail to motivate harder lifestyle changes. (high confidence) {5.4}  

* **Meta-analyses demonstrate that behavioural interventions, including the way choices are presented to consumers, work synergistically with price signals, making the combination more effective (medium confidence).** Behavioural interventions through nudges, and alternative ways of redesigning and motivating decisions, alone provide small to medium contributions to reduce energy consumption and GHG emissions. Green defaults, such as automatic enrolment in “green energy” provision, are highly effective. Judicious labelling, framing, and communication of social norms can also increase the effect of mandates, subsidies, or taxes. {5.4, 5.4.1, Table 5.3a, Table 5.3b}  

* **Coordinated change in several domains leads to the emergence of new low-carbon configurations with cascading mitigation effects (high confidence).** Demand-side transitions involve interacting and sometimes antagonistic processes on the behavioural, socio-cultural, institutional, business, and technological dimensions. Individual or sectoral level change may be stymied by reinforcing social, infrastructural, and cultural lock-ins. Coordinating the way choices are presented to end users and planners, physical infrastructures, new technologies and related business models can rapidly realise system-level change. {5.4.2, 5.4.3, 5.4.4, 5.4.5, 5.5}  
 



