# Chapter FAQs

*  **What can every person do to limit warming to 1.5°C?**   
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; People can be educated through knowledge transfer so they can act in different roles, and in each role everyone can contribute to limit global warming to 1.5°C. As citizens, with enough knowledge can organise and put political pressure on the system. Role models can set examples to others. Professionals (e.g., engineers, urban planners, teachers, researchers) can change professional standards in consistency with decarbonisation; e.g., urban planners and architects can design physical infrastructures to facilitate low-carbon mobility and energy use by making walking and cycling safe for children. Rich investors can make strategic plan to divest from fossils and invest in carbon-neutral technologies. As consumers, especially if one belongs to the top 10% of the world population in terms of income, can limit consumption, especially in mobility, and explore the good life consistent with sustainable consumption. Policy makers support individual actions in certain contexts not only by economic incentives, such as carbon pricing, but also by interventions that understand complex decision making processes, habits, and routines. Examples of such interventions include but are not limited to choice architectures and nudges that set green options as default, shift away from cheap petrol or gasoline, increasing taxes on carbon-intensive products, or substantially tightening regulations and standards support shifts in social norms, and thus can be effective beyond the direct economic incentive.

* **How does society perceive transformative change?**  
  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Human induced global warming, together with other global trends and events, such as digitalisation and automation, and the COVID-19 pandemic, induces changes in labour markets, and bring large uncertainty and ambiguity. History and psychology reveal that societies can thrive in these circumstances if they openly embrace uncertainty on the future and try out ways to improve life. Tolerating ambiguity can be learned, e.g., by interacting with history, poetry and the arts. Sometimes religion and philosophy also help.

* **Is demand reduction compatible with growth of human well-being?**  
 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; There is a growing realisation that mere monetary value of income growth is insufficient to measure national welfare and individual well-being. Hence, any action towards climate change mitigation is best evaluated against a set of indicators that represent a broader variety of needs to define individual well-being, macroeconomic stability, and planetary health. Many solutions that reduce primary material and fossil energy demand, and thus reduce GHG emissions, provide better services to help achieve well-being for all.
Economic growth measured by total or individual income growth is a main driver of GHG emissions. Only a few countries with low economic growth rates have reduced both territorial and consumption-based GHG emissions from, typically by switching from fossil fuels to renewable energy and by reduction in energy low/zero carbon fuels, but until now at insufficient rates and levels for stabilising global warming at 1.5°C. High deployment of low/zero carbon fuels and associated rapid reduction in demand and use of coal, gas, and oil can further reduce the interdependence between economic growth and GHG emissions.
