# Knowledge Gaps
### **Knowledge gap 1:**  
Better metric to measure actual human well-being Knowledge on climate action that starts with the social practices and how people live in various environments, cultures, contexts and attempts to improve their well-being, is still in its infancy. In models, climate solutions remain supply-side oriented, and evaluated against GDP, without acknowledging the reduction in well-being due to climate impacts. GDP is a poor metric of human well-being, and climate policy evaluation requires better grounding in relation to decent living standards and or similar benchmarks. Actual solutions will invariably include demand, service provisioning and end use. Literature on how gender, informal economies mostly in developing countries, and solidarity and care frameworks translate into climate action, but also how climate action can improve the life of marginalised groups remains scarce. The working of economic systems under a well-being driven rather than GDP driven paradigm requires better understanding.  

### **Knowledge gap 2:**  
Evaluation of climate implication of the digital economy The digital economy, as well as shared and circular economy, is emerging as template for great narratives, hopes and fears. Yet, there is few systematic evaluations of what is already happening and what can govern it towards a better narrative. Research needs to better gauge energy trends for rapidly evolving systems like data centres, increased use of social media and influence of consumption and choices, AI, blockchain, implication of digital divide among social groups and countries on well-being. Governance decisions on AI, indirectly fostering either climate harming or climate mitigating activities remain unexplored. Better integration of mitigation models and consequential life cycle analysis is needed for assessing how digitalisation, shared economy and circular economy change material and energy demand.  

### **Knowledge gap 3:**  
Scenario modelling of services Scenarios start within parameter-rich models carrying more than a decade-long legacy of supply side technologies that are not always gauged in recent technological developments. Service provisioning systems are not explicitly modelled, and diversity in concepts and patterns of lifestyles rarely considered. A new class of flexible and modular models with focus on services and activities, based on variety of data sources including big data collected and compiled is needed. There is scope for more sensitivity analysis on two aspects to better guide further detailed studies on societal response to policy. These aspects need to explore which socio-behavioural aspects/ organisation changes has biggest impact on energy/emissions reductions, and on the scale for take-back effects, due to interdependence on inclusion or exclusion of groups of people. Models mostly consider behavioural change free, and don’t account for how savings due to “avoid” measures may be re-spent. Most quantitatively measurable service indicators e.g. pkm or tkm are also inadequate to measure services in the sense of well-being contributions. More research is needed on how to measure e.g. accessibility, social inclusion etc. Otherwise services will also be poorly represented in scenarios.
