## Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)

+ FAQ 3.1 – Is it possible to stabilize warming without net negative CO2 and GHG emissions? 

<p>Yes. Achieving net zero CO2 emissions and sustaining them into the future is sufficient to stabilize the CO2-induced warming signal which scales with the cumulative net amount of CO2 emissions. At the same time, the warming signal of non-CO2 GHGs can be stabilized or reduced by declining emissions that lead to stable or slightly declining concentrations in the atmosphere. For short-lived GHGs with atmospheric lifetimes of less than 20 years, this is achieved when residual emissions are reduced to levels that are lower than the natural removal of these gases in the atmosphere. Taken together, mitigation pathways that bring CO2 emissions to net zero and sustain it, while strongly reducing non-CO2 GHGs to levels that stabilize or decline their aggregate warming contribution, will stabilize warming without using net negative CO2 emissions and with positive overall GHG emissions when aggregated using GWP100. A considerable fraction of pathways limiting warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot and likely limiting warming to 2°C, respectively, do not or only marginally (<10 GtCO2 cumulative until 2100) deploy net negative CO2 emissions (26% and 46%, respectively) and do not reach net zero GHG emissions by the end of the century (48% and 70%, respectively). This is no longer the case in pathways that return warming to 1.5°C after a high overshoot (typically > 0.1°C). All of these pathways deploy net negative emissions on the order of 330 (26-623 GtCO2) (median and 5th-95th percentile) and 87% achieve net negative GHGs emissions in AR6 GWP-100 before the end of the century. Hence, global net negative CO2 emissions, and net zero or net negative GHG emissions, are only needed to decline, not to stabilize global warming. The deployment of carbon dioxide removal (CDR) is distinct from the deployment of net negative CO2 emissions, because it is also used to neutralize residual CO2 emissions to achieve and sustain net zero CO2 emissions. CDR deployment can be considerable in pathways without net negative emissions and all pathways limiting warming to 1.5°C use it to some extent.<p>

+ FAQ 3.2 – How can net zero emissions be achieved and what are the implications of net zero emissions for the climate? 

<p>Halting global warming in the long term requires, at a minimum, that no additional CO2 emissions from human activities are added to the atmosphere (i.e., CO2 emissions must reach “net” zero). Given that CO2 emissions constitute the dominant human influence on global climate, global net zero CO2 emissions are a prerequisite for stabilizing warming at any level. However, CO2 is not the only greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming and reducing emissions of other greenhouse gases alongside CO2 towards net zero emissions of all GHGs would lower the level at which global temperature would peak. The temperature implications of net zero GHG emissions depend on the bundle of gases that is being considered, and the emissions metric used to calculate aggregated GHG emissions and removals. If reached and sustained, global net zero GHG emissions using the 100-year Global Warming Potential (GWP-100) will lead to gradually declining global temperature.<p>

+ FAQ 3.3 – How plausible are high emissions scenarios, and how do they inform policy?

<p>IAMs are used to develop a wide range of scenarios describing future trajectories for greenhouse gas emissions based on a wide set of assumptions regarding socio-economic development, technological changes, political development and climate policy. Typically, the IAM-based scenarios can be divided into a) reference scenarios (describing possible trajectories in the absence of new stringent climate policies) and b) mitigation scenarios (describing the impact of various climate policy assumptions). Reference scenarios typically result in high emissions and, subsequently, high levels of climate change (in the order of 2.5-4 °C during the 21st century). The purpose of such reference scenarios is to explore the consequences of climate change and act as a reference for mitigation scenarios. The possible emission levels for reference scenarios diverge from stabilising and even slowly declining emissions (e.g., for current policy scenarios or SSP1) to very high emission levels (e.g., SSP5 and RCP8.5). The latter leads to nearly 5 °C of warming by the end of the century for medium climate sensitivity. Hausfather and Peters (2020) pointed out that since 2011, the rapid development of renewable energy technologies and emerging climate policy have made it considerably less likely that emissions could end up as high as RCP8.5. This means that reaching emissions levels as high as RCP8.5 has become less likely. Still, high emissions cannot be ruled out for many reasons, including political factors and, for instance, higher than anticipated population and economic growth. Climate projections of RCP8.5 can also result from strong feedbacks of climate change on (natural) emission sources and high climate sensitivity (see WGI Chapter 7). Therefore, their median climate impacts might also materialise while following a lower emission path (e.g., Hausfather and Betts (2020)). All-in-all, this means that high-end scenarios have become considerably less likely since AR5 but cannot be ruled out. High-end scenarios (like RCP8.5) can be very useful to explore high-end risks of climate change but are not typical ‘business-as-usual” projections and should therefore not be presented as such.<p>
