## Summary for a student in high school

<p>Chapter 3 reviews the literature on emissions pathways to determine the key features that makeup the pathway (both in terms of similarities and variations) and to understand how decisions made by our societies may cause the system to take a certain course. When creating these paths, policies were taken into account. The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) make it possible to assess future greenhouse gas emissions and their uncertainties in a more methodical manner than was previously possible.  The main factors that contribute to emissions include growth in population, reaching 8.5-9.7 billion by 2050, and an increase in global GDP of 2.7-4.1% per year between 2015 and 2050. There are numerous routes described in the literature that would probably allow us to keep the earth's temperature comparable to preindustrial times, to a maximum of 2°C or to 1.5°C with a small margin for error. Since SR1.5 was published, global greenhouse gas emissions have increased, which resulted in greater near-term emissions (2030) and higher total CO2 emissions until when the emission of CO2 is balanced by certain methods removing CO2 (this stage is known as net zero). Due to these reasons, the possibility of limiting warming to 1.5C with no or restricted overshoot has decreased in AR6 compared to SR1.5.<p>

<p>Peak warming in mitigation pathways is determined by the net total CO2 emissions until the time of net zero CO2 and the warming contribution of other greenhouse gases and climate forcers at that time. If the combined economic impact of climate change is at the moderate to high end of the assessed range and the consequences of these impacts are accurately deduced (using economic theory) for the next 80-100 years, then pathways that limit warming to 2°C are likely more advantageous globally than they are cost-effective globally over the course of the twenty-first century. This is true even when advantages from other aspects of sustainable development or other effects of climate change are not taken into account. The huge effects of investments in low-carbon solutions on the economy and systemic changes away from emitting activities, co-benefits and negative side effects of mitigation, impacts of climate change (that could be avoided), and (reduced) adaptation costs are included in the overall global economic consequences of mitigation pathways. Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals may require ambitious mitigation, especially for ecosystems and populations who are less able to adapt to the effects of climate change. Health, particularly caused by air pollution, renewable energy access, and water availability are other dimensions with predicted co-benefits. Food, employment, water stress, and biodiversity are some of the factors that could be compromised. These factors are impacted by large-scale CDR deployment, energy affordability/access, and natural resource extraction. Targeted policies and investments, for example in the areas of healthy nutrition, sustainable consumption and production, and international collaboration, can support climate change mitigation policies.<p>

<p>Therefore, we can say that pathways having a broad range of mitigation methods can be more active and can recover from difficult conditions.<p>
