# Executive Summary
* Assessment of the social science literature and regional case studies reveals how social norms, culture, and individual choices, interact with infrastructure and other structural changes over time. This provides new insight into climate change mitigation strategies, and how economic and social activity might be organised across sectors to support emission reductions. To enhance well-being, people demand services and not primary energy and physical resources per se. Focusing on demand for services and the different social and political roles people play broadens the participation in climate action.  

### Potential of demand-side actions and service provisioning systems 
* Demand-side mitigation and new ways of providing services can help avoid, shift, and improve final service demand. Rapid and deep changes in demand make it easier for every sector to reduce GHG emissions in the short and medium term (high confidence).  

* The indicative potential of demand-side strategies across all sectors to reduce emissions is 40-70% by 2050 (high confidence). Technical mitigation potentials compared to the IEA WEO, 2020 STEPS baseline amounts up to 5.7 GtCO2eq for building use and construction, 8 GtCO2eq for food demand, 6.5 GtCO2eq for land transport, and 5.2 GtCO2eq for industry.Mitigation strategies can be classified as Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) options, that reflect opportunities for socio-cultural, infrastructural, and technological change. The greatest Avoid potential comes from reducing long-haul aviation and providing short-distance low-carbon urban infrastructures. The greatest Shift potential would come from switching to plant-based diets. The greatest Improve potential comes from within the building sector, and in particular increased use of energy efficient end-use technologies and passive housing.  
* Socio-cultural and lifestyle changes can accelerate climate change mitigation (medium confidence). Among 60 identified actions that could change individual consumption, individual mobility choices have the largest potential to reduce carbon footprints.Prioritizingcar-free mobility by walking and cycling and adoption of electric mobility could save 2 tCO2eq cap-1 yr-1. Other options with high mitigation potential include reducing air travel, cooling setpoint adjustments, reduced appliance use, shifts to public transit, and shifting consumption towards plant-based diets.  
* Leveraging improvements in end-use service delivery through behavioural and technological innovations, and innovations in market organisation, leads to large reductions in upstream resource use(high confidence). Analysis of indicative potentials range from a factor 10 to 20 fold improvement in the case of available energy (exergy) analysis, with the highest improvement potentials at the end-user and service-provisioning levels. Realisable service level efficiency improvements could reduce upstream energy demand by 45% in 2050.
