# Introduction
* The Sixth Assessment Report of the IPCC (AR6), for the first time, features a chapter on demand, services, and social aspects of mitigation. It builds on the AR4, which linked behaviour and lifestyle change to mitigating climate change (IPCC 2007; Roy and Pal 2009; IPCC 2014a), the Global Energy Assessment (Roy et al. 2012), and the AR5, which identified sectoral demand-side mitigation options across chapters (IPCC 2014b; Creutzig et al. 2016b; IPCC 2014a). The literature on the nature, scale, implementation and implications of demand-side solutions, and associated changes in lifestyles, social norms, and well-being, has been growing rapidly (Creutzig et al. 2021a) (Box 5.2). Demand-side solutions support near-term climate change mitigation (Méjean et al. 2019; Wachsmuth and Duscha 2019) and include consumers’ technology choices, behaviours, lifestyle changes, coupled production-consumption infrastructures and systems, service provision strategies, and associated socio-technical transitions. This chapter’s assessment of the social sciences (also see Supplementary Materials I Chapter 5) reveals that social dynamics at different levels offer diverse entry points for acting on and mitigating climate change (Jorgenson et al. 2018).  

* Three entry points are relevant for this chapter. First, well-designed demand for services scenarios are consistent with adequate levels of well-being for everyone (Rao and Baer 2012; Grubler et al. 2018; Mastrucci et al. 2020; Millward-Hopkins et al. 2020), with high and/or improved quality of life (Max-Neef 1995), improved levels of happiness (Easterlin et al. 2010) and sustainable human development (Arrow et al. 2013; Dasgupta and Dasgupta 2017).
Second, demand-side solutions support staying within planetary boundaries (Haberl et al. 2014; Matson et al. 2016; Hillebrand et al. 2018; Andersen and Quinn 2020; UNDESA 2020; Hickel et al. 2021; Keyßer and Lenzen 2021): they entail fewer environmental risks than many supply side technologies (Von Stechow et al. 2016) and make carbon dioxide removal technologies, such as Bio-Energy with Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS) less relevant (Van Vuuren et al. 2018) or possibly irrelevant in modelling studies (Grubler et al. 2018; Hickel et al. 2021; Keyßer and Lenzen 2021) still requiring ecosystem based carbon dioxide removal. In the IPCC’s SR1.5C (IPCC 2018), four stylised scenarios have explored possible pathways towards stabilising global warming at 1.5°C (SPM SR.15 Figure 3a (IPCC 2014a), (Figure 5.1) One of these scenarios, LED-19, investigates the scope of demand-side solutions (Figure 5.1). The comparison of scenarios reveals that such low-energy demand pathways eliminate the need for technologies with high uncertainty, such as BECCS.  

* The requisites for well-being include collective and social interactions as well as consumption-based material inputs. Moreover, rather than material inputs per se, people need and demand services for dignified survival, sustenance, mobility, communication, comfort and material well-being (Nakićenović et al. 1996b; Johansson et al. 2012; Creutzig et al. 2018). These services may be provided in many different context-specific ways using physical resources (biomass, energy, materials, etc.) and available technologies (e.g. cooking tools, appliances). Here we understand demand as demand for services (often requiring material input), with particular focus on services that are required for well-being (such as lighting, accessibility, shelter, etc.), and that are shaped by culturally and geographically differentiated social aspects, choice architectures and the built environment (infrastructures).  

* Focusing on demand for services broadens the climate solution space beyond technological switches confined to the supply side, to include solutions that maintain or improve well-being related to nutrition, shelter and mobility while (sometimes radically) reducing energy and material input levels (Creutzig et al. 2018; Cervantes Barron 2020; Baltruszewicz et al. 2021; Kikstra et al. 2021b). This also recognises that mitigation policies are politically, economically and socially more feasible, as well as more effective, when there is a two-way alignment between climate action and well-being (OECD 2019a). There is medium evidenceandhigh agreement that well-designed demand for services scenarios are consistent with adequate levels of well-being for everyone (Rao and Baer 2012; Grubler et al. 2018; Rao et al. 2019b; Millward-Hopkins et al. 2020; Kikstra et al. 2021b), with high and/or improved quality of life (Max-Neef 1995; Vogel et al. 2021) and improved levels of happiness (Easterlin et al. 2010) and sustainable human development (Gadrey and Jany-Catrice 2006; Arrow et al. 2013; Dasgupta and Dasgupta 2017). While demand for services is high as development levels increase, and related emissions are growing in many countries (Yumashev et al. 2020; Bamisile et al. 2021), there is also evidence that provisioning systems delink services provided from emissions (Conte Grand 2016; Patra et al. 2017; Kavitha et al. 2020). Various mitigation strategies, often classified into Avoid-Shift-Improve (ASI) options, effectively reduce primary energy demand and/or material input (Haas et al. 2015; Haberl et al. 2017; Samadi et al. 2017; Hausknost et al. 2018; Haberl et al. 2019; Van den Berg et al. 2019; Ivanova et al. 2020). Users’ participation in decisions about how services are provided, not just their technological feasibility, is an important determinant of their effectiveness and sustainability (Whittle et al. 2019; Vanegas Cantarero 2020) designed by urban planners and building and transport professionals, corresponding investments, and a political culture supportive of mitigation action. This is particularly true for many Avoid and Shift decisions that are difficult because they encounter psychological barriers of breaking routines, habits and imagining new lifestyles and the social costs of not conforming to society (Kaiser 2006). Simpler Improve decisions like energy efficiency investments on the other hand can be triggered and sustained by traditional policy instruments complemented by behavioural nudges.  

* A key concern about climate change mitigation policies is that they may reduce quality of life. Based on growing literature, in this chapter we adopt the concept of Decent Living Standards (DLS, explained further in relation to other individual and collective well-being measures and concepts in the Social Sciences Primer) as a universal set of service requirements essential for achieving basic human well-being. DLS includes the dimensions of nutrition, shelter, living condition, clothing, health care, education, and mobility (Frye et al. 2018; Rao and Min 2018b). DLS provides a fair, direct way to understand the basic low-carbon energy needs of society and specifies the underlying material and energy requirements. This chapter also comprehensively assesses related well-being metrics that result from demand-side action observing overall positive effects (5.3). Similarly, ambitious low-emissions demand-side scenarios suggest that well-being could be maintained or improved while reducing global final energy demand, and some current literature estimates that it is possible to meet Decent Living Standards for all within the 2-degree warming window (Grubler et al. 2018; Burke 2020; Keyßer and Lenzen 2021) (5.4). A key concern here is how to blend new technologies with social change to integrate Improving ways of living, Shifting modalities and Avoiding certain kinds of emissions altogether (5.6). Social practice theory emphasizes that material stocks and social relations are key in forming and maintaining habits (Reckwitz 2002; Haberl et al. 2021) . This chapter reflects these insights by assessing the role of infrastructures and social norms in GHG emission intensive or low-carbon lifestyles (5.4). A core operational principle for sustainable development is equitable access to services to provide well-being for all, while minimising resource inputs and environmental and social externalities/trade-offs, underpinning the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Princen 2003; Lamb and Steinberger 2017; Dasgupta and Dasgupta 2017). Sustainable development is not possible without changes in consumption patterns within the widely recognised constraints of planetary boundaries, resource availability, and the need to provide decent living standards for all (Langhelle 2000; Toth and Szigeti 2016; O’Neill et al. 2018). Inversely, reduced poverty and higher social equity offer opportunities for delinking demand for services from emissions, e.g., via more long-term decision making after having escaped poverty traps and by reduced demand for non-well-being enhancing status consumption (Nabi et al. 2020; Ortega-Ruiz et al. 2020; Parker and Bhatti 2020; Teame and Habte 2020) (5.3).  

* Throughout this chapter we discuss how people can realise various opportunities to reduce GHG emission-intensive consumption (5.2 and 5.3), and act in various roles (5.4), within an enabling environment created by policy instruments and infrastructure that builds on social dynamics (5.6).

