# Executive summary
**Although urbanization is a global trend often associated with increased incomes and higher consumption, the growing concentration of people and activities is an opportunity to increase resource efficiency and decarbonize at scale** (_very high confidence_). The same urbanization level can have large variations in per capita urban carbon emissions. For most regions, per capita urban emissions are lower than per capita national emissions. {<a href="Introduction.md#8.1.4">8.1.4</a>, 8.3.3, 8.4, Box 8.1}

**Most future urban population growth will occur in developing countries, where per capita emissions are currently low but expected to increase with the construction and use of new infrastructure and the built environment, and changes in incomes and lifestyles** (_very high confidence_). The drivers of urban Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions are complex and include an interplay of population size, income, state of urbanization, and how cities are laid out. How new cities and towns are designed, constructed, managed, and powered will lock-in behaviour, lifestyles, and future urban GHG emissions. Low-emission urbanization can improve well-being while minimizing impact on GHG emissions, but there is risk that urbanization can lead to increased global GHG emissions through increased emissions outside the city’s boundaries. {8.1.4, 8.3, Box 8.1, 8.4, 8.6}

**The urban share of global GHG emissions (including CO2 and CH4) is substantive and continues to increase**(_high confidence_). Total urban emissions based on consumption-based accounting were estimated to be 24.5 GtCO2-eq, or 62% of the global total in 2015, excluding aviation, shipping and biogenics, and increased to an estimated 28.5 ± 0.1 GtCO2-eq in 2020, representing about 67-72% of global emissions. About 100 of the highest emitting urban areas account for approximately 18% of the global carbon footprint. {8.1.6, 8.3.3}

**The urban share of regional GHG emissions increased between 2000 and 2015, with much inter-region variation in the magnitude of the increase**(_high confidence_). Globally, the urban share of national emissions increased 6 percentage points, from 56% in 2000 to 62% in 2015. For 2000 to 2015, the urban emissions share across WGIII AR6 regions increased from 28% to 38% in Africa, from 46% to 54% in Asia and Developing Pacific, from 62% to 72% in Developed Countries, from 57% to 62% in Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia, from 55% to 66% in Latin America and Caribbean, and from 68% to 69% in the Middle East. {8.1.6, 8.3.3}

**Per capita urban GHG emissions increased between 2000 and 2015, with cities in the Developed Countries region producing nearly seven times more per capita than the lowest emitting region** (_medium confidence_). From 2000 to 2015, the global urban GHG emissions per capita increased from 5.5 to 6.2 tCO2-eq/person (an increase of 11.8%); Africa increased from 1.3 to 1.5 tCO2-eq per person (22.6%); Asia and Developing Pacific increased from 3.0 to 5.1 tCO2-eq per person (71.7%); Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia increased from 6.9 to 9.8 tCO2-eq/person (40.9%); Latin America and the Caribbean increased from 2.7 to 3.7 tCO2-eq/person (40.4%); and Middle East increased from 7.4 to 9.6 tCO2-eq/person (30.1%). Albeit starting from the highest level, Developed Countries had a decline of 11.4 to 10.7 tCO2-eq/person (-6.5%). {8.3.3}

**The global share of future urban GHG emissions is expected to increase through 2050 with moderate to no mitigation efforts due to growth trends in population, urban land expansion and infrastructure and service demands, but the extent of the increase depends on the scenario and the scale and timing of urban mitigation action** (_medium confidence_). With aggressive and immediate mitigation policies to limit global warming below 1.5°C by the end of the century, including high levels of electrification, energy and material efficiency, renewable energy preferences, and socio-behavioural responses, urban GHG emissions could approach net zero and reach a maximum of 3 GtCO2-eq in 2050.

Under a scenario with aggressive but not immediate urban mitigation policies to limit global warming to 2°C, urban emissions could reach 17 GtCO2-eq in 2050. With no urban mitigation efforts, urban emissions could more than double from 2020 levels and reach 65 GtCO2-eq in 2050, while being limited to 34 GtCO2-eq in 2050 with only moderate mitigation efforts. {8.3.4}

**Urban land areas could triple between 2015 and 2050, with significant implications for future carbon lock-in**. There is a large range in the forecasts of urban land expansion across scenarios and models, which highlights an opportunity to shape future urban development towards low- or net zero GHG emissions and minimize the loss of carbon stocks and sequestration in the AFOLU sector due to urban land conversion (_medium confidence_). By 2050, urban areas could increase up to 211% over the 2015 global urban extent, with the median projected increase ranging from 43% to 106%. While the largest absolute amount of new urban land is forecasted to occur in Asia and Developing Pacific, and in Developed Countries, the highest rate of urban land growth is projected to occur in Africa, Eastern Europe and West-Central Asia, and in the Middle East. The infrastructure that will be constructed concomitant with urban land expansion will lock-in patterns of energy consumption that will persist for decades if not generations. Furthermore, given past trends, the expansion of urban areas is likely to take place on agricultural lands and forests, with implications for the loss of carbon stocks and sequestration. {8.3.1, 8.3.4, 8.4.1, 8.6}

**The construction of new, and upgrading of, existing urban infrastructure through 2030 will result in significant emissions** (_very high confidence_). The construction of new and upgrading of existing urban infrastructure using conventional practices and technologies can result in significant committed CO2 emissions, ranging from 8.5 GtCO2 to 14 GtCO2 annually up to 2030 and more than double annual resource requirements for raw materials to about 90 billion tonnes per year by 2050, up from 40 billion tonnes in 2010(_medium evidence, high agreement_).{8.4.1, 8.6}

**Given the dual challenges of rising urban GHG emissions and future projections of more frequent extreme climate events, there is an urgent need to integrate urban mitigation and adaptation strategies for cities to address climate change and withstand its effects**(_very high confidence_). Mitigation strategies can enhance resilience against climate change impacts while contributing to social equity, public health, and human well-being. Urban mitigation actions that facilitate economic decoupling can have positive impacts on employment and local economic competitiveness.{8.2, Cross-Working Group Box 2, 8.4}

**Cities can only achieve net zero or near net zero GHG emissions through deep decarbonisation and systemic transformation** (_very high confidence_). Urban deep decarbonisation entails implementing three broad strategies concurrently: (1) reducing urban energy consumption across all sectors, including through compact and efficient urban forms and supporting infrastructure; (2) electrification and switching to net zero emissions resources; and (3) enhancing carbon uptake and stocks (_medium evidence, high agreement_). Given the regional and global reach of urban supply chains, a city cannot achieve net zero GHG emissions by only focusing on reducing emissions within its administrative boundaries. {8.1.6, 8.3.4, 8.4, 8.6}

**Packages of mitigation policies that implement multiple urban-scale interventions can have 
 cascading effects across sectors, reduce GHG emissions outside of a city’s administrative 
 boundaries, and reduce more emissions than the net sum of individual interventions, particularly 
 if multiple scales of governance are included** (_high confidence_). Cities have the ability to implement 
 policy packages across sectors using an urban systems approach, especially those that affect key 
 infrastructure based on spatial planning, electrification of the urban energy system, and urban green and blue infrastructure. The institutional capacity of cities to develop, coordinate, and integrate sectoral

**Integrated spatial planning to achieve compact and resource-efficient urban growth through co-location of higher residential and job densities, mixed land use, and transit-oriented development could reduce GHG emissions between 23-26% by 2050 compared to the business-as-usual scenario**(_robust evidence, high agreement, very high confidence_). Compact cities with shortened distances between housing and jobs, and interventions that support a modal shift away from private motor vehicles towards walking, cycling, and low-emissions shared and public transportation, passive energy comfort in buildings, and urban green infrastructure can deliver significant public health benefits and have lower GHG emissions. {8.2, 8.3.4, 8.4, 8.6}

**Urban green and blue infrastructure can mitigate climate change through carbon sequestration, avoided emissions, and reduced energy use while offering multiple co-benefits** (_robust evidence, high agreement_).Urban green and blue infrastructure, including urban forests and street trees, permeable surfaces, and green roofs offer potentials to mitigate climate change directly through sequestering and storing carbon, and indirectly by inducing a cooling effect that reduces energy demand and reducing energy use for water treatment. Global urban trees store approximately 7.4 billion tonnes of carbon, and sequester approximately 217 million tonnes of carbon annually, although urban tree carbon storage and sequestration are highly dependent on biome. Among the multiple co-benefits of green and blue infrastructure are reducing the urban heat island (UHI) effect and heat stress, reducing stormwater runoff, improving air quality, and improving mental and physical health of urban dwellers. {8.2, 8.4.4}

**The potentials and sequencing of mitigation strategies to reduce GHG emissions will vary depending on a city’s land use and spatial form and its state of urbanization, whether it is an established city with existing infrastructure, a rapidly growing city with new infrastructure, or an emerging city with infrastructure build-up** (_medium confidence_).The long lifespan of urban infrastructures locks in behaviour and committed emissions. Urban infrastructures and urban form can enable socio-cultural and lifestyle changes that can significantly reduce carbon footprints. Rapidly growing cities can avoid higher future emissions through urban planning to co-locate jobs and housing to achieve compact urban form, and by leapfrogging to low-carbon technologies. Established cities will achieve the largest GHG emissions savings by replacing, repurposing, or retrofitting the building stock, strategic infilling and densifying, as well as through modal shift and the electrification of the urban energy system. New and emerging cities have unparalleled potential to become low or net zero GHG emissions while achieving high quality of life by creating compact, co-located, and walkable urban areas with mixed land use and transit-oriented design, that also preserve existing green and blue assets {8.2, 8.4, 8.6}

**With over 880 million people living in informal settlements, there are opportunities to harness and enable informal practices and institutions in cities related to housing, waste, energy, water, and sanitation to reduce resource use and mitigate climate change** (_low evidence, medium agreement_). The upgrading of informal settlements and inadequate housing to improve resilience and well-being offers a chance to create a low-carbon transition. However, there is limited quantifiable data on these practices and their cumulative impacts on GHG emissions. {8.1.4, 8.2.2, Cross-Working Group Box 2, 8.3.2, 8.4, 8.6, 8.7} 

**Achieving transformational changes in cities for climate change mitigation and adaptation will 
require engaging multiple scales of governance, including governments and non-state actors, and  in connection with substantive financing beyond sectoral approaches** (_very high confidence_). Large and complex infrastructure projects for urban mitigation are often beyond the capacity of local municipality budgets, jurisdictions, and institutions. Partnerships between cities and international institutions, national and region governments, transnational networks, and local stakeholders play a pivotal role in mobilizing global climate finance resources for a range of infrastructure projects with low-carbon emissions and related spatial planning programs across key sectors. {8.4, 8.5}
